[export] Add draft-export docs (#152637)
pytorch/pytorch: docs/source/draft_export.rst

.. _draft_export:

Draft Export
============

> TL;DR: Draft-export is a new version of export introduced in PyTorch 2.8 which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Draft-export is a new version of export, which is designed
```

> will always produce a graph, even if there are potential soundness issues. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to consistently produce a graph, even if there are potential soundness issues. It
```

> will also generate a report listing out all of the issues export runs into while

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generates a report listing out all of the issues encountered during
```

> tracing and provide additional debugging information. For custom operators that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tracing and provides additional debugging information. For custom operators that
```

don't have fake kernels, it will also generate a profile which you can register
to automatically generate a fake kernel.

> Have you ever tried to :func:`torch.export.export` a model, only to encounter a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have you ever tried to export a model using :func:`torch.export.export`, only to encounter a
```

data-dependent issue? You fix it, but then run into a missing fake kernel
problem. And after resolving that, you get hit with another data-dependent
issue. You wonder to yourself, I wish there was a way I could just get a graph
to play around with, and be able to view all the issues in one place so that I
can fix them later…

> Say hello to your new friend, ``draft_export``!

Reviewer: a bit colloquial but okay I guess =)
Could also say something like: ``draft_export`` to the rescue =)

``draft_export`` is a version of export which will always successfully export a
graph, even if there are potential soundness issues. These issues will then be

> compiled into a report for clearer visualization, which can be fixed later on.

Reviewer 2: can we get a`.. warning` directive with, don't use in prod somewhere?

> What sort of errors will it catch?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What sort of errors does it catch?
```

----------------------------------

> Draft-export will help catch and debug the following errors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Draft-export helps to catch and debug the following errors:
```

> * Guard on data-dependent errors

Reviewer: Need a blank line I think
```suggestion
* Guard on data-dependent errors

```

* Constraint violation errors
* Missing fake kernels
* Incorrectly written fake kernels

> * How does it work?

Reviewer: My guess this was a title?
```suggestion

How does it work?
-------------------
```

In normal export, we will convert the sample inputs into FakeTensors and use
them to record operations and trace the program into a graph. Input tensor
shapes that can change (which are marked through ``dynamic_shapes``), or values

> within tensors (typically from a ``.item()`` call) will be represented as a symbolic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
within tensors (typically, from an ``.item()`` call) will be represented as a symbolic
```

> shape (SymInt) instead of a concrete integer. However some issues may occur

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shape (``SymInt``) instead of a concrete integer. However, some issues may occur
```

> while tracing: We may run into guards that we cannot evaluate, like if we want

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while tracing — we may run into guards that we cannot evaluate, like if we want
```

to check if some item in a tensor is greater than 0 (``u0 >= 0``). Since the tracer

> doesn't know anything about the value of u0, it will throw a data-dependent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
doesn't know anything about the value of ``u0``, it will throw a data-dependent
```

error.  If the model uses a custom operator but a fake kernel hasn't been

> defined for it, then we will error with fake_tensor.UnsupportedOperatorException

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defined for it, then we will error with ``fake_tensor.UnsupportedOperatorException``
```

> because export doesn't know how to apply this on FakeTensors.  If a custom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because export doesn't know how to apply this on ``FakeTensors``. If a custom
```

operator has a fake kernel implemented incorrectly, export will silently produce
an incorrect graph that doesn't match the eager behavior.

To fix the above errors, draft-export uses *real tensor tracing* to guide us on
how to proceed when tracing. As we trace the model with fake tensors, for every
operation that happens on a fake tensor, draft-export will also run the operator
on stored real tensors which come from the example inputs passed to export. This
allows us to address the above errors: When we reach a guard that we cannot
evaluate, like ``u0 >= 0``, we will use the stored real tensor values to
evaluate this guard. Runtime asserts will be added into the graph to ensure that

> the graph asserts the same guard that we assumed while tracing.  If we run into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the graph asserts the same guard that we assumed while tracing. If we run into
```

a custom operator without a fake kernel, we will run the operator's normal
kernel with the stored real tensors, and return a fake tensor with the same rank

> but unbacked shapes.  Since we have the real tensor output for every operation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but unbacked shapes. Since we have the real tensor output for every operation,
```

This runs into a “missing fake kernel” error for ``mylib.foo2`` and then a
``GuardOnDataDependentExpression`` because of the slicing of ``z`` with ``a``,
an unbacked symint.

To call ``draft-export``, we can replace the ``torch.export`` line with the following:

::

    from torch.export._draft_export import draft_export
    ep = draft_export(M(), inp)

``ep`` is a valid ExportedProgram which can now be passed through further environments!

Debugging with draft-export
---------------------------

In the terminal output from draft-export, you should see the following message:

.. code-block::

    #########################################################################################
    WARNING: 2 issue(s) found during export, and it was not able to soundly produce a graph.
    To view the report of failures in an html page, please run the command:
        `tlparse /tmp/export_angelayi/dedicated_log_torch_trace_axpofwe2.log --export`
    Or, you can view the errors in python by inspecting `print(ep._report)`.
    ########################################################################################

While running draft-export, we will output logs into a file which is displayed

> in this error message. The errors can be viewed in python through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in this error message. You can view Python errors by using
```

> ``print(ep._report)``, or the logs can be passed into tlparse to generate an html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``print(ep._report)`` or you can pass the logs into ``tlparse`` to generate an html
```

report.

Running the ``tlparse`` command in the terminal will generate a
`tlparse <https://github.com/pytorch/tlparse>`_
HTML report. Here is an example of the

> tlparse report:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``tlparse`` report:
```

.. image:: _static/img/export/draft_export_report.png

Clicking into the Data Dependent Error, we will see the following page which

> contains information to help debug this error. Specifically it contains:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contains information to help debug this error. Specifically, it contains:
```

* The stacktrace at which this error occurs
* A list of local variables and their shapes
* Information for how this guard was created

.. image:: _static/img/export/draft_export_report_dde.png

The returned Exported Program
-----------------------------

Because draft-export specializes on code paths based on the example inputs, the
exported program resulting from draft-export is guaranteed to be runnable and
return correct results for **at least** the given example inputs. Other inputs can
work, as long as they match the same guards that were taken when we were
draft-exporting.

For example, if we have a graph branching on if a value is greater than 5, if in
draft-export our example inputs were greater than 5, then the returned

> ExportedProgram will specialize on that branch, and will assert that the value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ExportedProgram`` will specialize on that branch, and will assert that the value
```

is greater than 5. This means that the program will succeed if you pass in
another value greater than 5, but will fail if you pass in a value less than 5.

> This is more sound than torch.jit.trace, which will silently specialize on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is more sound than using ``torch.jit.trace``, which will silently specialize on the
```

> branch. The proper way for torch.export to support both branches would be to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
branch. The proper way for ``torch.export`` to support both branches would be to
```

> rewrite the code using torch.cond, which will then capture both branches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rewrite the code using ``torch.cond``, which will then capture both branches.
```

Because of the runtime assertions in the graph, the returned exported-program is

> also retraceable with torch.export or torch.compile, with a minor addition in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also retraceable with ``torch.export`` or ``torch.compile``, with a minor addition in
```

the case where a custom operator is missing a fake kernel.

Generating Fake Kernels
-----------------------

> If a custom operator does not contain a fake impl, currently draft-export will

Reviewer: what is "impl"? implementation? should we spell out?
```suggestion
If a custom operator does not contain a fake impl, currently draft-export will
```

use the real-tensor propagation to get an output for the operator and continue

> tracing. However if we run the exported program with fake tensors or retrace the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tracing. However, if we run the exported program with fake tensors or retrace the
```

exported model, we will still fail because there is still no fake kernel
implementation.

To address this, after draft-export, we will generate an operator profile for
each custom operator call that we encounter, and store this on the report

> attached to the exported program: ep._report.op_profiles. Users can then use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attached to the exported program: ``ep._report.op_profiles``. Users can then use the
```

    # Load the yaml
    loaded_op_profile = load_op_profiles("op_profile.yaml")

The operator profile is a dictionary mapping operator name to a set of profiles
which describe the input and outputs of the operator, and could be manually
written, saved into a yaml file, and checked into a codebase. Here's an example
of a profile for ``mylib.foo.default``:

::

    "mylib.foo.default": {
        OpProfile(
            args_profile=(
                TensorMetadata(
                    rank=2,
                    dtype=torch.float32,
                    device=torch.device("cpu"),
                    layout=torch.strided,
                ),
                TensorMetadata(
                    rank=2,
                    dtype=torch.float32,
                    device=torch.device("cpu"),
                    layout=torch.strided,
                ),
            ),
            out_profile=TensorMetadata(
                rank=2,
                dtype=torch.float32,
                device=torch.device("cpu"),
                layout=torch.strided,
            ),
        )
    }

``mylib.foo.default``'s profile contains only one profile, which says that for 2

> input tensors of rank 2, dtype float32, device cpu, we will return one tensor of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
input tensors of rank 2, dtype float32, device CPU, we will return one tensor of
```

> rank 2, dtype float32, and device cpu. Using the context manager, will then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rank 2, dtype float32, and device CPU. Using the context manager, will then
```

generate a fake kernel where given 2 input tensors of rank 2 (and the other
tensor metadata), we will output one tensor of rank 2 (and the other tensor
metadata).

If the operator also supports other input ranks, then we can add the profile to
this list of profiles, either by manually adding it into the existing profile or
rerunning draft-export with new inputs to get new profiles, so that the

> generated fake kernel will support more input types. Otherwise it will error.

Reviewer: maybe add, where to go from here, like See Also.

            a = res.item()
            a = -a
            a = a // 3
            a = a + 5

            z = torch.cat([z, z])

            torch._check_is_size(a)
            torch._check(a < z.shape[0])

            return z[:a]

    inp = (torch.tensor(3), torch.tensor(4), torch.ones(3, 3))

    ep = torch.export.export(M(), inp)

This runs into a “missing fake kernel” error for ``mylib.foo2`` and then a
``GuardOnDataDependentExpression`` because of the slicing of ``z`` with ``a``,
an unbacked symint.

To call ``draft-export``, we can replace the ``torch.export`` line with the following:

::

    from torch.export._draft_export import draft_export
    ep = draft_export(M(), inp)

``ep`` is a valid ExportedProgram which can now be passed through further environments!

Debugging with draft-export
---------------------------

In the terminal output from draft-export, you should see the following message:

.. code-block::

    #########################################################################################
    WARNING: 2 issue(s) found during export, and it was not able to soundly produce a graph.
    To view the report of failures in an html page, please run the command:

>         `tlparse /tmp/export_angelayi/dedicated_log_torch_trace_axpofwe2.log --export`

Reviewer 2: 1) draft export automatically dumps a log for tlparse?
